JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: It's
the last Super
Tuesday of the primary election
season. Six
states cast their votes, just as
Hillary Clinton
crosses the delegate threshold.
But Bernie
Sanders says it's still not
over.
Also ahead this Tuesday:
Do you believe he's fit to be
president?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader:
The American people are going to
make that
decision.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I sit down with
Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell to talk
about Donald
Trump, the race for the White
House, and the
Kentucky senator's new book.
And as states battle the federal
government
over which bathrooms transgender
people should
use, one student is pushing her
school to
be on the frontier of change.
MADDIE DALTON, Student, Atherton
High School:
It all comes down to being
respected as a
person. Now, that's all relying
on the fundamental
assumption that you respect
being transgender
as a legitimate, like, concept,
as a legitimate
thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's the last
Super Tuesday
of the 2016 primary season, and
it's something
of an anticlimax. According to
new delegate
counts, Hillary Clinton wrapped
up the Democratic
nomination overnight, hours
before polls opened
in six states.
Meanwhile, Republican Donald
Trump was the
center of a firestorm in his own
party over
his comments about a federal
judge of Mexican
descent. We will have a full
report after
the news summary.
In the day's other news: A car
bombing killed
11 people and wounded 36 in
Istanbul, Turkey.
The target was a police vehicle,
and seven
of the dead were officers. The
blast shook
a neighborhood that houses
universities and
ancient Roman sites. It was the
city's fourth
attack this year, but the
Turkish president
vowed not to be intimidated.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): These terrorist
activities, these
steps are being taken against
those responsible
for providing security. This is
unforgivable,
inexcusable. We will continue
our struggle
against the terrorists until the
end, fearlessly
and tirelessly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The escalation in
violence
is blamed mostly on Kurdish
rebels and Islamic
State militants.
The leaders of the world's two
largest democracies
met today, with climate change
high on the
agenda. President Obama welcomed
India's Prime
Minister Narendra Modi to the
White House.
They discussed getting India to
join a landmark
climate change agreement this
year, among
other things. India is the
world's third largest
carbon emitter, after China and
the U.S.
Another set of high-level talks
between the
U.S. and China wrapped up today
in Beijing.
Secretary of State John Kerry
urged the Chinese
to reduce barriers for foreign
businesses.
The Chinese, in turn, agreed to
stop flooding
global markets with excess
steel. There was
no progress reported on
territorial disputes
in the South China Sea.
Here in the U.S., the Pacific
Northwest kicked
off a major earthquake and
tsunami drill today.
The four-day event dubbed
Cascadia Rising
assumes a catastrophic quake
just 95 miles
off the Oregon coast. The
affected area would
include the cities of Seattle
and Portland.
Both U.S. and Canadian agencies
are taking
part in the drill.
KENNETH MURPHY, FEMA: These type
of events
are survivable. If you take the
time to make
some personal preparations, and
work with
your family and how you're going
to communicate,
and then how you're going to
help your neighbors
and your community and so forth,
that will
make probably the biggest
difference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some 20,000
people will be
involved in the exercise.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial
average gained about 18 points
to close at
17938. The Nasdaq fell seven
points, and the
S&P 500 added two. And oil
closed above $50
a barrel for the first time
since July.
And the last surviving 9/11
search dog has
died in Texas at age 16. In
2001, Bretagne,
a golden retriever, helped hunt
for human
remains at the World Trade
Center site. She
was euthanized Monday at a
clinic outside
Houston, after suffering kidney
failure. First-responders
lined the sidewalk and draped an
American
flag over Bretagne's coffin.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
six states
vote as Hillary Clinton crosses
the delegate
threshold; Mitch McConnell on
whether Donald
Trump is fit to be president;
mafia-linked
businesses exploiting migrants
in Italy; and
much more.
First up: the 2016 contest for
president.
From one end of the country to
the other,
it was a day for voting, for
delegate-counting,
distancing, and a little
explaining.
WOMAN: You think you're going
here today?
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I think we got a shot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Bernie
Sanders making
one last push in California this
morning,
in San Francisco, hoping not
just for votes,
but for an argument to keep his
campaign going.
Overnight, the Associated Press
declared Hillary
Clinton now has enough delegates
to nail down
the Democratic nomination. She
touted the
news in Long Beach, but urged
her supporters
not to relax.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I got to tell you, according to
the news,
we are in the brink of a
historic, historic,
unprecedented moment.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: But we
still have
work to do, don't we?
JUDY WOODRUFF: All told, another
694 delegates
are at stake in the states
voting today.
Bernie Sanders appealed to his
voters to disregard
the delegate count.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: That's
really not accurate.
And that's not me talking. That
is the Democratic
National Committee, who says
that the media
shouldn't lump together the
pledged delegates,
which are real delegates pledged
to a candidate,
and superdelegates, who will not
be voting
until July 25, and who have the
right to change
their mind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But any way you
count delegates,
Clinton was well ahead going
into the day's
primaries. Significantly, if you
look at just
pledged delegates, the one
Sanders sees as
real delegates, Clinton led
Sanders by 291
this afternoon.
When superdelegates are
included, the Associated
Press had Clinton at the magic
number, 2,383,
more than 800 ahead. One of the
most prominent
superdelegates lined up behind
her this morning.
House Minority Leader Nancy
Pelosi of California
officially ended her neutrality
on ABC.
REP. NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
I have voted for Hillary Clinton
for president
of the United States, and proud
to endorse
her for that position.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is history
eight years to
the day since Clinton conceded
the nomination
in 2008 to then-Senator Barack
Obama.
But as camp Clinton celebrated
today, Republican
Donald Trump came under intense
new criticism
from within his own party, at
issue, his claim
that a Latino judge overseeing a
lawsuit against
Trump University is biased
against him and
his claim days later that Muslim
judges could
also be biased.
In Washington, House Speaker
Paul Ryan took
Trump to task, but stopped short
of rejecting
the presumptive nominee.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
I disavow these comments. I
regrets those
comments that he made.
I don't think -- claiming a
person can't do
the job because of their race is
sort of like
the textbook definition of a
racist comment.
I think that should be
absolutely disavowed.
It's absolutely unacceptable.
But do I believe
that Hillary Clinton is the
answer? No, I
do not.
Do I believe that Hillary
Clinton is going
to be the answer to solving
these problems?
I do not. I believe that we have
more common
ground on the policy issues of
the day and
we have more likelihood of
getting our policies
enacted with him than we do with
her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A former Trump
rival, South
Carolina Senator Lindsey Graham,
went further,
in The New York Times. He said:
"This is the
most un-American thing from a
politician since
Joe McCarthy. If anybody was
looking for an
off-ramp, this is probably it."
But, in New Jersey, Governor
Chris Christie,
another former rival and now a
Trump backer,
came to his defense.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R), New
Jersey: Donald
Trump is not a racist. And so
the allegations
that he is are absolutely
contrary to every
experience I have had with him
over the last
14 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Late this
afternoon, Trump
himself defended his criticism
of Judge Curiel,
saying in a statement that his
comments had
been -- quote -- "misconstrued
as a categorical
attack against people of Mexican
heritage."
This even as Republican U.S.
Senator Mark
Kirk of Illinois reversed his
earlier endorsement
of the presumptive nominee,
announcing that
he had -- quote -- "concluded
that Donald
Trump has not demonstrated the
temperament
necessary to assume the greatest
office in
the world" -- end quote.
Well, now we turn back to the
Democrats, with
our John Yang in Santa Monica,
California,
and political director Lisa
Desjardins. She
is in Brooklyn, New York.
Thanks to both of you for being
here.
Lisa, to you first. It is a
historic moment
for Hillary Clinton, but, as we
reported,
she is telling her supporters
not to relax.
Is that a real worry for them?
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton doesn't
seem worried
about clinching the nomination.
In fact, on
background, her staff has told
me that they
think tonight is the night, an
historic night.
They will proclaim themselves as
having clinched
the nomination tonight on this
stage behind
me. But, Judy, they want to win
California.
They want to go into the general
election
with a sign of strength. Losing
California,
that wouldn't be such a sign of
strength.
Right now, they're pivoting to
going after
Trump even more.
On her schedule, the next two
public events
are in Ohio and in Pennsylvania
in one week.
What's significant about those
states? Oh,
a little thing called swing
voters. Those
two states will be critical to
whomever wins
the presidential election this
year in the
fall.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John, in
California, shoe
on the other foot, how concerned
are the Sanders
-- is the Sanders camp that
their supporters
may just fade away if they think
this contest
is over?
JOHN YANG: Well, Judy, if you go
by social
media, it may have done the
other -- gone
the other way.
Overnight, Facebook, Twitter
full of messages
accusing the media of conspiring
to suppress
the Sanders vote here in
California. Whether
that translates into a big surge
or a big
turnout for Sanders remains to
be seen.
There are about -- it's hard to
judge from
the polling places. The
estimates are that
more than half the ballots cast
in today's
primary will have been mail-in
ballots, mail-in
votes. A check -- I have been
calling around
to -- very random, unscientific
check of polling
places, of poll observers in
Northern California,
here in the Los Angeles area,
here in Santa
Monica, say that the polls have
been slower
than they were even four years
ago, when there
was no real Democratic contest,
in the renomination
of Barack Obama.
So, we will know in a few hours
what the effect
is -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Interesting.
So, Lisa, you were saying the
Clinton folks
focused on what's next.
What are you learning about
whether her message
is changing, given the fact that
we're at
this turning point in the
campaign?
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes, Judy,
tonight, Hillary
Clinton is going to go all in on
the women
message.
She's going to debut a video
which shows repeated
images of women. In fact,
looking at this
video, there's almost no images
of men, where
she's talking about being a
woman, promoting
women, and about this historic
moment tonight
for her.
It's no secret she wants to win
the presidency
with women and also in this
video minorities.
So, she is pivoting fully that
way, which
is different than in 2008, Judy,
you remember,
where she said, I happen to be a
woman, but
I'm not running as a woman.
It seems tonight, Judy, they're
launching
a message where she's running
full stop as
a woman, no doubt about it. And
it's a little
different. I remember being at
that speech
eight years ago where she
conceded to Barack
Obama. The campaign tonight
feels like they
want to really flex their
muscles.
And to be honest, Judy, they are
expecting
Senator Sanders eventually to be
magnanimous.
They say they will reach out to
Sanders voters,
but no decision yet on whether
he will be
mentioned by name, at least when
I talked
to staff recently, tonight or
not. We will
have to wait and see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John, what
are Sanders
people saying about what comes
next? Everybody
wants to know, is he taking this
all the way
to the convention or not?
JOHN YANG: Well, they
acknowledge their only
path to a nomination is if they
can convince
superdelegates to switch from
Hillary Clinton
to support Senator Sanders, and
that their
argument would be that he is the
stronger
candidate against Donald Trump
in the fall.
They also acknowledge that no
superdelegates
-- they cannot name a single
superdelegate
who has switched. They say that
they were
hoping obviously for a win in
California to
bolster that argument. They
would also argue
that they had a West Coast
sweep, winning
Washington, Oregon state as
well, but they
also say that no decisions are
going to be
made about how to keep going
forward until
tomorrow, after the votes are --
the results
are known here.
They also say that the campaigns
have been
talking, the two campaigns have
been talking
at the staff level about the way
to move forward,
and they acknowledge those talks
will intensify
after tomorrow -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, whatever
the delegate
count at this point, we are all
on the edge
of our seats, and we will be
talking to both
of you through the night.
John Yang, Lisa Desjardins,
thanks.
Now a different take on the 2016
presidential
election.
It comes from the Senate
majority leader,
Republican Mitch McConnell of
Kentucky. He
has just published his memoir,
"The Long Game,"
after five terms in the U.S.
Senate. He is
the longest-serving senator in
Kentucky history.
I sat down with the senator this
morning at
the offices of the National
Republican Senatorial
Committee here in Washington.
Senator Mitch McConnell, thank
you very much
for talking with us.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader:
Glad to be with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're here to
talk about your
memoir, "The Long Game."
There's a lot going on right now
at this moment
politically. And I want to get
to that.
You write about the people who
influenced
you, of course, your mother,
your father.
You write about a senator from
Kentucky, John
Sherman Cooper, Mike Mansfield.
When you think about these
people and their
influence in your life, how does
Donald Trump
compare?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: Well, he's
certainly
a different kind of person in
politics, totally
different.
The Republican voters wanted
somebody from
outside, and they picked
somebody from outside.
We will see in the end whether
that works
out. They don't seem to be happy
with either
candidate. They don't care for
Hillary Clinton
and they don't care for Donald
Trump, but
the American people, at least in
the Republican
primaries and caucuses, clearly
wanted somebody
totally different. And that's
who they nominated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and you
mentioned Hillary
Clinton. Today, we learned that
she apparently
has done something historic,
become the first
woman to clinch enough delegates
to become
the nominee of a major political
party in
this country.
You know her. What do you think
of her?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: Well,
Hillary Clinton
is a very, very experienced
insider.
So, you're going to have a race
between the
ultimate outsider and a
long-term insider.
And the American people, I
think, are going
to have to make a big decision
about whether
they're satisfied where the
country is now.
If they are, then I think
Hillary Clinton
would get another four years,
and it would
be very similar to the last
eight.
If, on the other hand the
country, wants to
dramatically go in a different
direction,
they're certainly going to have
the opportunity
by voting for Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You do write
also, Senator,
throughout the book about your
commitment
to racial diversity, among other
things, about
your marriage to Elaine Chao,
who happens
to be of Chinese heritage.
You have been asked in the last
few days about
what Donald Trump said about the
judge, federal
judge of Mexican heritage, and
his denouncing
him. You have said you don't in
any way accept
what Donald Trump has said, but
when you were
asked if it was racist, you
didn't answer.
Now that you have had some time
to think...
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: Well, what
he said was
-- it was outrageous and
inappropriate. And
I couldn't more strongly condemn
that.
The implication here is that
those who came
to America legally over the
years are somehow
second-class citizens. My wife
came here at
age 8 not speaking a word of
English and ended
up in the president's Cabinet.
We all got here from somewhere
else going
back in our lineage. And I think
these gratuitous
attacks on Americans who got
here recently
or whose parents got here
recently need to
stop.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At this point,
Donald Trump
is doubling down on that
statement. He is
not backing off of it. If he
doesn't back
off, what are the implications?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: Well, he
needs to back
off. This is a time he ought to
be reaching
out and talking about things
that the American
people are consumed with, like
the slow growth
in the country, the lack of
opportunity for
all of us, the fact that they're
falling behind.
There are plenty of things he
ought to be
talking about, rather than
taking shots at
Americans because of their
ethnicity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, again, if he
doesn't back
off of this and say that it was
a mistake,
what are the implications?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: Well, he
needs to -- he
needs to quit doing this.
This is not the way to bring
America together.
It's not the way to unify the
Republican Party,
and it's not the way to win the
fall election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what if he
doesn't?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: It's not
the way to
win the fall election by doing
what he's been
doing. It needs to stop.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Washington
Post columnist
Eugene Robinson wrote today that
you don't
believe Donald Trump is fit to
be president.
Do you believe he's fit to be
president?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: The
American people
are going to make that decision.
And they're
in the process of determining
who the next
president is going to be.
And I think, you know, it's been
pretty clear
that, in the right-of-center
world, that is,
the primaries and caucuses,
conducted among
Republicans, they wanted to do
something different,
and that's our nominee, and in
the fall, we
will see what the American
people decide.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think he's
fit to be
president?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: I think we
need to respect
the wishes of voters.
They have been busily at work
making these
decisions in primary after
primary after primary.
We will find out in the fall.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you believe,
Senator, there's
any chance the Republicans could
choose another
nominee at the convention in
Cleveland?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: I think
the nomination
fight is over, and our nominee
ought to accept
that graciously and begin to
reach out to
other members of our party who
didn't support
him and pull them together and
discontinue
these attacks on citizens based
on their ethnicity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What has his
nomination done
to the Republican Party?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: Well,
right now, we're
in great shape. We have a record
number of
U.S. House members, 54 senators,
31 governors,
more legislators and control of
legislatures,
too, that at any time since the
'20s.
So, we'd like the keep it that
way. The way
to finish changing America is to
win the White
House. And I hope we can do it
this fall.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, people
are looking
at the character of their two
choices this
fall, Hillary Clinton and Donald
Trump. What
do they see? What should they
see?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: Well,
we're going the
find out this fall. The American
people have
a big decision to make. We
couldn't have two
more different candidates than
these two.
Neither one of them are very
popular, so it's
going to be for many Americans a
difficult
choice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, Senator,
let's talk
about this remarkable book. You
write very
poignantly about when you were
very young,
having polio. Your mother
lovingly took care
of you. You got through that.
And you refer
back to it throughout the book.
How has that
affected your political life and
your philosophy?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: It's bound
to have had
a huge impact.
I mean, my mother was confronted
with the
following situation. Her husband
was in Europe
fighting the Germans. She was --
moved to
be with her sister in a rural
community in
Alabama. And there was a big
polio epidemic,
I subsequently found out, in
1944. And I was
one of them.
And it hits you like the flu,
and then, when
the flu went away, you could
have all different
kinds of outcomes, from dying to
complete
recovery. Happily enough, we
were one hour's
drive from Warm Springs, where
President Roosevelt
had set up the polio treatment
center.
My mother took me over there.
They trained
her how to do a physical therapy
regimen and
said, do it four times a day.
The hard part
was, don't let him start trying
to walk.
And can you imagine dealing with
a 2-year-old
and subsequently a 3-year-old,
keeping him
off his feet? My first memory in
life was
the last visit to Warm Springs,
where they
told my mother I was going to be
OK, I wouldn't
have to wear a brace, and I
would have a normal
childhood.
So, I think it was a -- it had
to have been
an early lesson that tenacity
and hard work
and sticking to it that I
learned from my
mother, and I have tried --
applied that over
and over again throughout my
life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Mitch
McConnell, the
Senate majority leader, the book
is "The Long
Game." It's a memoir and really
a wonderful
read.
Thank you, Senator.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: Thank you.
Appreciate
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
growing outrage
over a Stanford University
student's six-month
sentence for sexual assault; and
how the debate
over transgender students is
playing out in
one Kentucky school.
But, first: Europe's problems in
coping with
the refugee crisis have taken a
new, ominous
twist, the involvement of the
mafia.
Authorities in Sicily have
uncovered a $4
billion fraud scheme involving a
reception
center for migrants. This comes
as humanitarian
groups predict a grim summer in
the Western
Mediterranean, as thousands of
migrants and
refugees attempt to reach
Europe. Many have
already died.
From Sicily, special
correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This Norwegian
tanker pulling
into the Sicilian port of
Augusta is a lifesaver.
Its crew rescued 220 people
whose overcrowded
vessel sank off the southern
Greek island
of Crete after setting off from
Egypt.
As many as 300 others are feared
to have drowned,
among them, the mothers of two
Egyptian girls
aged 3 and 7. Eighty of those on
board the
tanker were children. The
ruthlessness of
the people smugglers in North
Africa dismays
Giovanna Di Benedetto of Save
the Children.
GIOVANNA DI BENEDETTO, Save the
Children:
It's all very dangerous because
people traffickers
don't have any respect for human
beings, for
human life, for pregnant women
or children
or babies. So these people are
forced to do
this travel in very dangerous
boats.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Having survived
the perilous
crossing from North Africa,
these unaccompanied
children are attempting to phone
home to let
their relatives know they are
safe.
This Eritrean boy begged to use
a mobile phone
to call his brother in Holland;
17-year-old
Eliyas Bahra from Eritrea was
with six friends
on board an unpowered boat that
was being
towed by another craft. When it
began to take
on water, the line was cut. This
was just
one disaster that made May this
year one of
the deadliest months on record,
as this footage
from the Italian navy shows.
ELIYAS BAHRA, Refugee: The first
boat had
a motor. Our boat not have a
motor. This water
full -- our boat is full of
water. Me and
six friends are not dead. Me and
six friends,
altogether seven, seven not
dead, 450 person
dead, people.
MALCOLM BRABANT: These teenagers
from Gambia
in West Africa are exploring a
town near the
center where they are living
while their asylum
cases are being considered;
17-year-old Alieu
Kah has dreams of furthering his
education
and following in the footsteps
of Italian
soccer star Francesco Totti.
They have all
witnessed too much.
ALIEU KAH, Refugee: I saw people
shouting
inside the river, shouting,
"Help, help."
But we couldn't help them,
because our own
boat is full. It's around 120
people in one
boat, 120 people. I feel very
sad, because
my fellow human beings are
dying, and we cannot
help. It's very sad. It made me
very sad.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The journey to
reach Sicily
was perilous on land, as well as
sea. They
traveled from Gambia, through
Senegal, Mali,
Burkina Faso, to Niger, and then
they had
to cross the Sahara Desert to
Libya, where
they encountered violent
smugglers, who forced
the migrants onto overcrowded
boats.
ALIEU KAH: Libyan people, some
are good, but
some are not good. They shot
many of our friends
in their legs. They would break
all their
legs.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Giuseppe
Bonanno Conti wants
to stop the influx. He's a
regional leader
of a right-wing party called New
Force, and
is urging Europe to emulate the
uncompromising
tactics of Australia, which
turned back migrants
vessels and eventually deterred
boat people
coming from South Asia.
GIUSEPPE BONANNO CONTI, New
Force (through
translator): Our navy should act
like Australia's,
close our sea and not allow
anyone in, so
that people traffickers realize
that no one
can enter Italy anymore. There
would no longer
be mass immigration, and we
would save human
lives. In such an awful way,
these people
are fed to the fish in the
Mediterranean.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Listening into
the conversation
was Vincenzo Rizzo, who's
concerned that Sicily
has the highest unemployment
rate in the European
Union.
VINCENZO RIZZO, Italy (through
translator):
The only thing that's planned is
for refugees,
Muslims, and Africans. There are
no longer
laws for Italians, nothing to
counter unemployment.
It's as if Italians no longer
existed.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But these
Africans feel anything
but privileged. The younger ones
spend their
days cycling around the
countryside near Europe's
largest permanent refugee camp,
where some
of them have been waiting three
or four years
to find out whether they can
stay or will
be deported.
There's a history of trouble
here, because
frustrations occasionally boil
over. The guards
are heavily armed.
Madil Sano is an I.T. graduate
from Senegal
who would only allow us to film
him in profile.
MADIL SANO, Refugee (through
translator):
This place is appalling. It's
like hell. It's
a huge prison. They believe that
Africans
are illiterate, that we don't
understand anything,
that we're like animals.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Accordion
players strike
up the iconic "Godfather" theme
to remind
tourists of Sicily's deep-rooted
mafia connections.
Across the island, small
businesses have to
pay protection money. The
alternative is to
have their livelihoods
extinguished. There's
no doubt that the mafia is
involved in most,
if not all aspects of
immigration. This week,
the authorities closed down this
reception
center because they discovered
links between
the so-called nonprofit
organization running
it and well-known mafia
families.
The finance police investigated
the money
trail for supplies of food,
clothes and cleaning
materials, and uncovered a $4
billion fraud.
Local chief prosecutor Francesco
Paolo Giordano
is convinced that this is just
the tip of
a mob-controlled iceberg.
FRANCESCO PAOLO GIORDANO, Chief
Prosecutor
(through translator): The mafia
has total
control of the territory. It
would be absurd
not to think they have
infiltrated the business
of clandestine immigration.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The mafia
aside, Europe is
struggling to cope with the
strain of the
migration crisis and is doing
what it can
to stop a repeat of last year's
record influx,
when a million people cross the
Mediterranean
in search of sanctuary or new
opportunities.
Angela Lupo, a lawyer with the
Italian Council
for Refugees is predicting a
long, fatal summer.
ANGELA LUPO, Italian Council for
Refugees
(through translator): There will
be more and
more deaths. The people
traffickers are reorganizing
themselves to make the highest
profit, which
is fundamental to them.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Some migration
experts believe
that these latest disasters in
the Mediterranean
are a direct consequence of the
European Union's
deal with Turkey, which has so
far stemmed
the flow of migrants and
refugees to Greece.
But the pressure to reach Europe
has not diminished.
And so traffickers and their
desperate clientele
are being forced to find
different and more
dangerous routes.
Fate has been kind to these
people. After
being saved from the deep, they
have the gift
of life. But Europe's internal
borders are
being tightened with every
passing day. Their
struggle for a new existence is
just beginning.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Sicily.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: the
sentencing in a sexual
assault case at Stanford
University attracting
international outrage.
Last week, 20-year-old Brock
Turner was sentenced
to six months in jail for the
assault of an
unconscious woman. Turner, who
was a competitive
swimmer with Olympic hopes, was
convicted
on three felony counts,
including intent to
commit rape of an intoxicated
woman.
The judge, who said he weighed
Turner's lack
of criminal history and
remorsefulness, gave
him a lenient sentence. The
unidentified victim
read a letter in court that she
later released
to the news Web site BuzzFeed.
It went viral.
In it, she wrote -- quote --
"How fast Brock
swims does not lessen the
severity of what
happened to me, and should not
lessen the
severity of his punishment. If a
first-time
offender from an underprivileged
background
was accused of three felonies
and displayed
no accountability for his
actions other than
drinking, what would his
sentence be?"
And joining us now is Michelle
Anderson. She's
the dean of the School of Law at
the City
University of New York.
Dean Anderson, thank you very
much for being
here.
I want to read just a part of
what Brock Turner's
father wrote in a letter to the
judge.
He said -- quote -- "This is a
steep price
to pay for 20 minutes of action
out of his
20-plus years of life."
How does the sentence that
20-year-old Brock
Turner receive compare to other
sexual assault
-- people who were convicted of
in similar circumstances? How do
they compare?
MICHELLE ANDERSON, Dean, CUNY
School of Law:
Well, it's a challenging
question, because
courts are really all over the
map in terms
of how they sentence sexual
assault.
Cases like this not infrequently
receive very
light sentences. Sometimes, if
the circumstances
are different, they receive
heavier sentences.
What's interesting about this
case is that
it's an unusual case, in that
it's not a he
said/she said. It's a case in
which the two
witnesses found the incident
happening as
it was occurring, and chased the
defendant
down, and held him until the
police came.
There was physical evidence
corroborating
the victim's story. So, it was
unusual in
that sense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The district
attorney had argued
for six years. As we said, the
judge said
six months.
What does a judge take into
consideration
in coming up with sentencing?
MICHELLE ANDERSON: So, judges
frequently take
into consideration obviously the
prior history
of the defendant, whether or not
he or she
has been convicted of other
offenses, sometimes,
the age of a defendant and the
circumstances
of the offense, how much
violence was used
at the time.
These are the kinds of factors
that are taken
into account. And so taking
those factors
into account is not unusual.
Taking into account
the duration of time that the
father mentioned
in his statement wouldn't be
something that
would necessarily be part of --
would be an
ordinary factor that would be
assessed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about
the fact that
this 20-year-old man comes from
what appears
to be an upper-middle-class
background?
MICHELLE ANDERSON: So, that's an
interesting
element of this case.
What you have got is a
circumstance that doesn't
comport with the stereotype of
what many people
believe rape is like. It's a
white defendant,
someone who is -- comes from a
privileged
background. Whatever his
financial status
before he attended Stanford, he
certainly
comes from an elite institution,
was considered
an All-American swimmer, an
athlete of great
import to the Stanford
community, and with
hopes of becoming an Olympic
athlete.
So, those are the kinds of
factors, I think,
that color the way that the
media and the
public have responded to this
case, someone
who comes from extraordinary
privilege, in
a case that's fairly
straightforward, from
a -- from the -- given the fact
that there
were witnesses and the evidence
in the form
of corroborative evidence on the
victim's
body.
These are unusual aspects of the
case. And
the disparity in privilege
between the defendant
and the victim is also --
heightens the interest
in this kind of a case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to ask you
finally about
the letter the victim read to
the accused.
We haven't identified -- she
hasn't been identified,
but she read out loud in the
courtroom to
the accused man. She said -- and
this is part
of it -- she said: "I want to
show people
that one night of drinking can
ruin two lives,
you and me. You are the cause, I
am the effect.
You have dragged me through this
hell with
you, dipped me back into that
night again
and again. If you think I was
spared, came
out unscathed, that today I ride
off into
sunset, while you suffer the
greatest blow,
you are mistaken."
What are we left with? We know
most victims
don't speak out like this. What
do we -- what
should we take away from this?
MICHELLE ANDERSON: Well, the
case is unusual
because of the extraordinary
articulateness
of this particular victim, and
the fact that
she used the opportunity to say
some important
things about how rape is
experienced by its
victims.
The part of the victim's
statement that really
hit home with me and I think
with many other
people is the part where she
says, "I didn't
want my body anymore."
And we know that rape and sexual
assault can
be an invasion of privacy. It
can be something
that degrades somebody and takes
away their
dignity. But the notion that it
takes away
one's possession of one's own
body and that
one wants to reject one's own
body, I found
that very powerful, and that
quotation has
come up and been reposted again
and again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it is
certainly -- this
is a case that has certainly
left, I think,
an impact on many, many people.
Dean Michelle Anderson with the
City University
of New York Law School, thank
you very much.
MICHELLE ANDERSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Public schools
are caught in
the middle of a political debate
over bathrooms.
The Obama administration says
restricting
a transgender student's access
to restrooms
and locker rooms based on
biological sex is
discrimination and can be
grounds for withholding
funding.
But that directive has set off
some angry
reaction. Kentucky is one state
where many
leaders don't agree with the
president. And
we look at how one school in
Louisville decided
to act proactively before the
bigger debate
began.
Special correspondent Yasmeen
Qureshi of Education
Week has the story. It's part of
our weekly
education series, Making the
Grade.
YASMEEN QURESHI: What's it like
to question
your gender?
MADDIE DALTON, Student, Atherton
High School:
It's a little bit scary in the
very beginning,
I suppose, because you know that
you're going
to have to face a lot of
discrimination.
Like, go through the YouTube
comments on any
video about trans people, and
you will see,
like, just how many people are
still, like,
openly hostile to this idea.
YASMEEN QURESHI:
Seventeen-year-old Maddie
Dalton is transgender. She says
she's always
been a girl, but didn't know it.
CASSANDRA KASEY, Parent:
Forever, she had
that little widow's peak.
YASMEEN QURESHI: She came out to
her parents
when she was 15 years old.
CASSANDRA KASEY: It was chaotic
at first.
And the way I felt it in the
very beginning,
when I was still coming to terms
with it,
was, if I had a friend who came
to me and
said that their child had come
out to them
as transgender, I would have
thought, hooray.
You know, your -- this young
person is becoming
who they are.
So, why would I not afford my
own child that
same -- that same blessing? So,
even though
it was difficult, it was the
only right thing
to do.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Maddie is a
junior at Atherton
High School in Louisville,
Kentucky. She was
the first openly transgender
student at the
school.
MADDIE DALTON: I was a little
bit hesitant
right at first, but I knew that,
being at
Atherton, I would be -- I would
be pretty
safe.
YASMEEN QURESHI: A public high
school with
about 1,300 students, Atherton
is one of the
highest-ranked schools in the
state. It's
known for its international
studies program
and as a place where diversity
is embraced.
TONY PRINCE, Teacher, Atherton
High School:
Developing a safe climate for
students is
fundamental. And I think that we
did -- we
were doing that here before we
ever started
on the transgender issue.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Humanities
teacher Tony Prince
supervises the school's LGBT
student group.
Maddie confided in him about her
newly realized
gender identity.
TONY PRINCE: I asked her what
that means.
You know, what would the school
look like
to her if it were accepting of
her as a transgender
person? And so she wrote a
little list of
things.
MADDIE DALTON: I wanted it to be
enforced
that students and teachers
should use my name
and pronouns and to use the
space that I identify
with, so bathrooms and locker
rooms.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Atherton didn't
have a protocol
for transgender students. The
decision was
left to principal Dr. Thomas
Aberli.
DR. THOMAS ABERLI, Principal,
Atherton High
School: Our school protects all
students,
and that the issue of gender
identity has
simply been a demonstration of
the school's
commitment to respecting all
individuals in
our school.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Aberli agreed
to Maddie's
requests and, after much
consideration, so
did the school council, making
it the first
school in Kentucky to adopt an
official policy
for transgender students.
MAN: This policy is completely
disregarding
the privacy of all of their
students.
YASMEEN QURESHI: A group of
parents, students
and community members publicly
objected and
hired an attorney to appeal the
decision.
WOMAN: The girls at this school
expect to
be able to go into a restroom
and feel safe.
Because of this policy, we no
longer have
that assurance.
YASMEEN QURESHI: The group
called for transgender
students to use a private or
unisex bathroom.
Why would that be a problem for
you?
MADDIE DALTON: First of all, it
makes you
a target for bullying and, like,
harassment.
It puts it in everyone's minds
that you are
different, and you are something
to be looked
at, not as, like, a person, but
as whatever
characteristic is
differentiating you, like
being trans.
YASMEEN QURESHI: After months of
debate at
Atherton High School, the policy
was upheld,
but the opposition didn't stop
there.
KENT OSTRANDER, Executive
Director, The Family
Foundation: Young ladies, girls,
may not want
a biological male in their
bathroom. That's
kind of the traditional way we
have done things
since the founding of this
nation.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Kent Ostrander
is the director
of The Family Foundation of
Kentucky, a conservative
advocacy organization. Last
year, it supported
a statewide bill that would have
overturned
Atherton's policy. But it was
never passed
into law.
KENT OSTRANDER: The legislation
simply said
that schools could do all kinds
of accommodations
for their students, including
transgender
students. But the one thing that
they could
not do is put -- is mix the
biological sexes
in a bathroom, a locker room at
the same time.
SUZANNE ECKES, Indiana
University: According
to guidelines coming from the
U.S. Department
of education and the U.S.
Department of Justice,
that is discrimination.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Education
policy professor
Suzanne Eckes is referring to a
letter the
Obama administration sent to
schools last
month. It directed them to allow
transgender
students access to bathrooms and
locker rooms
based on their gender identity.
SUZANNE ECKES: The department
has interpreted
gender identity to fall under
the Title IX
law, which prohibits
discrimination based
on sex. We don't have a lot of
court guidance
on it. So, if you're in a state
that has no
litigation on this particular
topic, the only
thing you really have to go on
is the recent
"Dear Colleague" letter.
YASMEEN QURESHI: However,
several Republican
state leaders are advising
schools to ignore
the guidance, putting them at
risk of losing
federal funding.
KENT OSTRANDER: Why does there
have to be
a new federal government law
telling everybody
how they're going to do the
bathrooms? That's
just crazy. Why is the federal
government
interested in bathrooms?
Because states can make that
decision on their
own. Parents can make that
decision.
SUZANNE ECKES: I don't think
this is a Democrat
or Republican or liberal or
conservative issue.
This is a civil rights issue.
This isn't a
states' rights issue. This is a
civil rights
issue. Transgender students, for
years, have
been ostracized in public
schools.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Nearly half of
transgender
teens report having suicidal
thoughts. And
their rates of depression and
anxiety are
far higher than the average.
MAN: Good morning, Atherton High
School.
YASMEEN QURESHI: It's been over
two years
since Atherton High School
adopted its bathroom
policy, and several students at
the school
have since come out as
transgender.
Principal Aberli says that,
despite early
objections to the policy, most
students have
embraced it.
NATALIE STASTNY, Student,
Atherton High School:
It's just going to the bathroom.
You go do
your business, then you wash
your hands, and
then you leave. It's just
simple. And when
people make a big deal about it,
it just kind
of gets blown out of proportion.
NIJA MACKEY, Student, Atherton
High School:
Coming from, like, a religious
background,
like, I am Christian, and people
don't necessarily
agree with that type of stuff.
But I have
been going to this school for
two years, and
it's just routine. Like,
everyone gets to
the restroom, everyone gets out.
It's nothing,
nothing. It's not a big deal.
DR. THOMAS ABERLI: Something I
struggled with
originally was just
understanding the difference
between what it meant to
discriminate vs.
accommodate when it came to this
issue. If
any student said that they were
uncomfortable
with using a restroom, then they
can choose
an alternate restroom.
But we're not to compel other
people to act
differently just because they
make someone
else feel uncomfortable. That is
not what
our country is about. That is
not a right
to privacy.
YASMEEN QURESHI: The school
provides access
to private faculty restrooms for
any student
who requests it.
MADDIE DALTON: It all comes down
to being
respected as a person and
accepted. Now, that's
all relying on the fundamental
assumption
that you respect being
transgender as a legitimate,
like, concept, as a legitimate
thing. And
I think that's where most of the
trouble comes
in.
YASMEEN QURESHI: In Louisville,
Kentucky,
this is Yasmeen Qureshi of
Education Week
reporting for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
back in a moment.
But, first, take this time to
hear from your
local PBS station. It's a chance
to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday: as
Nepal rebuilds from the
earthquake a year
ago, a report on child labor
used in manufacturing
bricks.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.